.TH BIT 1 "April 2026" "Tungsten" "Tungsten Package Manager"
.SH NAME
bit \- Tungsten package manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bit
.I COMMAND
[options] [ARGS]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bit
is the official package manager for the Tungsten programming language.
It creates, builds, tests, publishes, and consumes Tungsten packages (bits).
It reads a
.BR Bitfile (5)
from the project root, resolves dependencies against the registry, and
manages the local bit cache.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-copyright
Print the copyright notice.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print version and enable verbose mode.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help.
.SH COMMANDS
.PP
.B Help
.RS 4
.nf
bit help                Show help
bit help commands       List all commands
bit env                 Show local bit environment info
bit doctor              Check local and publish readiness
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Identity setup
.RS 4
.nf
bit create              Create a registry profile
bit signup              Create a registry profile
bit login               Store or fetch registry credentials
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Project lifecycle
.RS 4
.nf
bit new NAME            Create a new bit project
bit init                Initialize a bit in the current directory
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Dependencies
.RS 4
.nf
bit search QUERY        Search the registry
bit info NAME           Show bit details, versions, and security status
bit install             Install dependencies from Bitfile
bit uninstall NAME      Remove a dependency
bit update              Update dependencies to latest allowed versions
bit outdated            Show dependencies with newer versions available
bit audit               Audit locked dependency security metadata
bit prune               Remove unused dependencies
bit list                List installed dependencies
bit bundle              Vendor dependencies into the bit
bit open NAME           Open a dependency's source in $EDITOR
bit viz                 Visualize the dependency graph
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Build and test
.RS 4
.nf
bit build               Compile the bit
bit clean               Remove build artifacts
bit spec                Run the spec suite
bit bench               Run benchmarks
bit lint                Run the linter
bit console             Start a REPL with dependencies loaded
bit exec CMD            Run a command in the bit's environment
bit generate TYPE       Scaffold files (class, spec, etc.)
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Publishing
.RS 4
.nf
bit pack                Create a .bit archive
bit sign                Sign the bit archive for publishing
bit push                Run CI, sign, and publish
bit publish             Alias for bit push
bit yank NAME VERSION   Yank a published version
bit unpublish           Remove a version from the registry
bit deprecate           Mark a version as deprecated (still installable)
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Identity and config
.RS 4
.nf
bit author              Manage author identity and registry credentials
bit config              View and set bit configuration
bit env                 Show registry, profile, key, toolchain, and project paths
bit doctor              Check Bitfile, lockfile, tools, auth, and signing setup
.fi
.RE
.SH PROJECT STRUCTURE
.PP
.BR "bit new pg"
creates:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
pg
├─ bin
│  └─ pg*
├─ spec
│  ├─ support/
│  └─ pg_spec.w
├─ lib
│  ├─ pg
│  │  └─ version.w
│  └─ pg.w
├─ Bitfile
├─ LICENSE
└─ README.md
.fi
.RE
.PP
Layout rules:
.IP \(bu 2
.BR lib/NAME.w
is the main entry point.
.B use NAME
loads this file.
.IP \(bu 2
.BR lib/NAME/
holds internal modules.
.IP \(bu 2
.BR lib/NAME/version.w
holds a version constant (convention, not required).
.IP \(bu 2
.BR bin/NAME
is the optional CLI binary. Its filename must match the bit name.
.IP \(bu 2
.BR spec/
holds test files.
.B bit spec
discovers
.BR *_spec.w
here.
.IP \(bu 2
.BR spec/support/
holds test helpers loaded before specs.
.SH VALID BIT NAMES
.RS 4
.nf
/^
   [a\-z]         # Begins with lowercase letter
  ([a\-z0\-9]+\-?)* # Dash separated alpha\-numerics, no double dashes
   [a\-z0\-9]      # No trailing dash, no single character names
$/x
.fi
.RE
.SH VALID VERSIONS
.RS 4
.nf
/^
  (?<major> 0 | [1\-9][0\-9]* ) \e.
  (?<minor> 0 | [1\-9][0\-9]* ) \e.
  (?<tiny>  0 | [1\-9][0\-9]* )
  (?<note>
    \e. ( alpha | beta | rc )
       ( [1\-9][0\-9]* )?
  )?
$/x
.fi
.RE
.PP
Pre-release ordering:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
1.0.0.alpha < 1.0.0.alpha2 < 1.0.0.beta < 1.0.0.beta2
            < 1.0.0.rc    < 1.0.0.rc2  < 1.0.0
.fi
.RE
.PP
A bare pre-release tag
.RB ( 1.0.0.alpha )
sorts as
.BR 1.0.0.alpha1 .
.SH VERSION CONSTRAINTS
.RS 4
.nf
"1.0.0"             Exact version.
">= 1.0.0"          Minimum version.
"< 2.0.0"           Maximum version (exclusive).
"~> 1.2"            Pessimistic: >= 1.2.0 and < 2.0.0.
"~> 1.2.3"          Pessimistic: >= 1.2.3 and < 1.3.0.
">= 1.0", "< 3"     Multiple constraints (all must be satisfied).
.fi
.RE
.SH RESERVED BIT NAMES
.RS 4
.nf
/^(w\-|tungsten)/
.fi
.RE
.PP
Names beginning with
.B w\-
are reserved for the Tungsten standard library. Names beginning with
.B tungsten
are reserved for official Tungsten project packages.
.SH COMMAND LINE BINARIES
A bit can have one and only one CLI command, which matches the bit name.
Related commands should be exposed as subcommands:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
pg migrate
pg console
pg dump
.fi
.RE
.PP
This prevents PATH pollution and keeps one bit equal to one command. If two
tools are genuinely unrelated, they belong in two bits.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR Bitfile (5),
.BR bit-install (1),
.BR tungsten (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Bit is developed and maintained by Erik Peterson.
